doc: graph: add document for sdpa with compressed key and value (#2301)
oneapi-src/oneDNN: doc/graph/fusion_patterns/sdpa_with_compressed_kv.md

> SDPA with Compressed Key and Value {#dev_guide_graph_compressed_sdpa}

Reviewer: nit: dev_guide_graph_sdpa_compressed_kv to better align with the subject and content.

=====================================================================

## Overview

Int4 and int8 compression for Key and Value are exploited in fused Scaled
Dot-Product Attention (SDPA)[1] to reduce the memory footprint of generative
inference of LLM, especially when KV cache mechanism is adopted. Specifically,
Key and Value tensors are stored using lower precision data types like int4 and
int8 to reduce memory usage, and are subsequently de-quantized to wider floating
point types such as f16 and bf16 for computation.

Note that grouped quantization is required to improve the model accuracy,

> especially for int4 data types. In this case, group size is neededas an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
especially for int4 data types. In this case, group size is needed as an
```

attribute for quantization, which indicates the number of elements that share
the same scaling factor and zero-points in each quantization group.

The notations used in this topic are:

- N: The mini-batch size.
- H: The head number.
- S: The sequence length.
- D: The size of each head.

> - G: The group size

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- G: The group size.
```

[SDPA pattern](@ref dev_guide_graph_sdpa) to support the following three kinds
of compressed SDPA patterns:

1. SDPA with compressed Key and Value.
2. SDPA with floating-point Key and compressed Value.
3. SDPA with compressed Key and floating-point Value.

The floating-point data types include f32, f16 and bf16, and the compressed
data type refers to low-precision integral data types, including int4 (u4/s4)
and int8 (u8/s8) data types.

In oneDNN Graph API, we support quantization through a pattern with quantization
operations such as [DynamicDequantize](@ref dev_guide_op_dynamicdequantize) and
[DynamicQuantize](@ref dev_guide_op_dynamicquantize). The supported pattern is
as follows. The blue nodes are required while the brown nodes are optional.

![compressed SDPA pattern](images/compressed_sdpa_pattern.png)

Compared to a typical SDPA pattern, there are a few differences:

1. Two additional DynamicDequantize operations are applied to the input Key and
Value to convert the integral cache to floating-point values. 
2. Apart from the Query, Key and Value inputs, the pattern requires additional
quantization information such as scale and zero-points for the dequantization of

> Key and Value caches. Currently, oneDNN only supports grouped quantization

Reviewer: what do you mean by "caches"?

on one dimenstion; specifically, the shapes of scale and zero-points for Key and

> Value de-quantization should be ( N, H, S, D/G).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Value de-quantization should be (N, H, S, D/G).
```

|:--------|:--------|:--------|:----------------|:-------|:--------|:----------------|:-------|
| dt_fp   | dt_int  | dt_fp   | u4,s4,u8,s8,s32 | dt_int | dt_fp   | u4,s4,u8,s8,s32 | dt_fp  |
| dt_fp   | dt_int  | dt_fp   | u4,s4,u8,s8,s32 | dt_fp  | N/A     | N/A             | dt_fp  |
| dt_fp   | dt_fp   | N/A     | N/A             | dt_int | dt_fp   | u4,s4,u8,s8,s32 | dt_fp  |

Notes:
- dt_fp can be: f16, bf16 or f32.
- dt_int can be: u8, s8, u4 or s4.
- zero-point inputs are optional.

You can specify the data type via the input and output data type fields of
logical tensors for each operation. The definition of the data types and support
status on different CPU and GPU platforms follow the general description in
@ref dev_guide_data_types.

### Floating-point Math Mode

You should set the floating-point math mode
(@ref dev_guide_attributes_fpmath_mode) when using SDPA with compressed Key and
Value. Generally, the math mode should align with the data type of the Query,
which indicates the computation data type. Additionally, the second boolean
flag, `apply_to_int`, should be set to true. You can configure these attribute

> values using the `set_fpmath_mode` API on the graph object.

Reviewer: I'm wondering if we can have a link to the API.

Author: Good point. I attached a link to the API.

## Implementation Limitations

- oneDNN primitive-based SDPA with compressed Key and Value is implemented as
a reference implementation on both Intel Architecture Processors and Intel
Graphics Products. The reference implementation requires memory to store the
intermediate results of the dot products between Query and Key which takes
\f$O(S^2)\f$ memory. It may lead to Out-of-Memory error when computing long
sequence length input on platforms with limited memory.
- The compressed SDPA patterns functionally support all input shapes meeting
the shape requirements of each operation in the graph.
- CPU
    - oneDNN does not provide optimized implementation on CPU currently. All
    executions will be implemented with the primitive-based reference
    computation.
- GPU
    - Optimized implementation is available for 4D Q/K/V tensors with the shape
    defined as (N, H, S, D) for Query and Value, (N, H, D, S) for Key,
    (N, H, D/G, S) for scales and zero-points of Key (if available) and
    (N, H, S, D/G) for scales and zero-points of Value (if available).

>     - Optimized implementation is avaiable for compressed SDPA with `f16`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Optimized implementation is available for compressed SDPA with `f16`
```

    computation data type on Intel Graphics Products with Intel(R) Xe Matrix
    Extensions (Intel(R) XMX) support.
    - If int4 zero-points are specified, optimized implementation will be only

>     avaibable when the group size equals 16.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    available when the group size equals 16.
```

SDPA with Compressed Key and Value {#dev_guide_graph_sdpa_compressed_kv}

> =====================================================================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
========================================================================
```

## Overview

> Int4 and int8 compression for Key and Value are exploited in fused Scaled

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
int4 and int8 compressions for Key and Value are exploited in fused Scaled
```

Dot-Product Attention (SDPA)[1] to reduce the memory footprint of generative
inference of LLM, especially when KV cache mechanism is adopted. Specifically,
Key and Value tensors are stored using lower precision data types like int4 and
int8 to reduce memory usage, and are subsequently de-quantized to wider floating

> point types such as f16 and bf16 for computation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
point data types such as f16 and bf16 for computation.
```

Note that grouped quantization is required to improve the model accuracy,
especially for int4 data types. In this case, group size is needed as an
attribute for quantization, which indicates the number of elements that share
the same scaling factor and zero-points in each quantization group.

The notations used in this topic are:

- N: The mini-batch size.
- H: The head number.
- S: The sequence length.
- D: The size of each head.
- G: The group size.

> ## Pattern

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## SDPA Pattern
```

The SDPA pattern with compressed Key and Value is defined as a directional
acyclic graph (DAG) using oneDNN Graph API. oneDNN extends
[SDPA pattern](@ref dev_guide_graph_sdpa) to support the following three kinds
of compressed SDPA patterns:

1. SDPA with compressed Key and Value.
2. SDPA with floating-point Key and compressed Value.
3. SDPA with compressed Key and floating-point Value.

The floating-point data types include f32, f16 and bf16, and the compressed
data type refers to low-precision integral data types, including int4 (u4/s4)
and int8 (u8/s8) data types.

In oneDNN Graph API, we support quantization through a pattern with quantization
operations such as [DynamicDequantize](@ref dev_guide_op_dynamicdequantize) and
[DynamicQuantize](@ref dev_guide_op_dynamicquantize). The supported pattern is
as follows. The blue nodes are required while the brown nodes are optional.

![compressed SDPA pattern](images/compressed_sdpa_pattern.png)

Compared to a typical SDPA pattern, there are a few differences:

1. Two additional DynamicDequantize operations are applied to the input Key and

> Value to convert the integral cache to floating-point values. 

Reviewer: cache?

2. Apart from the Query, Key and Value inputs, the pattern requires additional
quantization information such as scale and zero-points for the dequantization of
Key and Value tensors. Currently, oneDNN only supports grouped quantization

> on one dimenstion; specifically, the shapes of scale and zero-points for Key and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on one dimension; specifically, the shapes of scale and zero-points for Key and
```

Author: Typo fixed. Thanks for pointing out.

- zero-point inputs are optional.

You can specify the data type via the input and output data type fields of
logical tensors for each operation. The definition of the data types and support
status on different CPU and GPU platforms follow the general description in
@ref dev_guide_data_types.

### Floating-point Math Mode

You should set the floating-point math mode
(@ref dev_guide_attributes_fpmath_mode) when using SDPA with compressed Key and
Value. Generally, the math mode should align with the data type of the Query,
which indicates the computation data type. Additionally, the second boolean
flag, `apply_to_int`, should be set to true. You can configure these attribute
values using the `set_fpmath_mode` API
(@ref dnnl::graph::graph::set_fpmath_mode) on the graph object.

## Implementation Limitations

- oneDNN primitive-based SDPA with compressed Key and Value is implemented as
a reference implementation on both Intel Architecture Processors and Intel
Graphics Products. The reference implementation requires memory to store the
intermediate results of the dot products between Query and Key which takes
\f$O(S^2)\f$ memory. It may lead to Out-of-Memory error when computing long

> sequence length input on platforms with limited memory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sequence length inputs on platforms with limited memory.
```

SDPA with Compressed Key and Value {#dev_guide_graph_compressed_sdpa}
=====================================================================

## Overview

> The KV Cache mechanism was developed to improve the efficiency of models by

Reviewer 2: We need to spell out KV.

> The KV Cache mechanism was developed to improve the efficiency of models by

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The KV Cache mechanism is developed to improve the efficiency of models by
```

reducing computational redundancy when processing long sequences of data. It
stores previously computed hidden states of Key and Value, to enable faster
retrieval and speed up inference processes. However, with the growing popularity
of KV Cache, the memory required for caching has become a significant bottleneck
affecting model performance.

To address this, Scaled Dot-Product Attention (SDPA)[1] with compressed Keys and
Values is implemented to minimize the memory footprint during generative
inference in large language models. Specifically, Key and Value tensors are
stored using lower precision data types like int4 and int8 to reduce memory
usage, and are subsequently de-quantized to wider floating point types such as
f16 and bf16 for computation.

> It's worth noting that grouped quantization is required to improve model

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that grouped quantization is required to improve the model
```

> accurarcy, especially for int4 data types. In this case, group size is needed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
accuracy, especially for int4 data types. In this case, group size is needed
```

as an attribute for quantization, which indicates the number of elements that
share the same scaling factor and zero-points in each quantization group.

> The notations used in the document:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The notations used in this topic are:
```

> - N: the mini-batch size.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- N: The mini-batch size.
```

> - H: the head number.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- H: The head number.
```

> - S: the sequence length.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- S: The sequence length.
```

> - D: the size of each head.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- D: The size of each head.
```

> - G: the group size

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- G: The group size.
```

## Pattern

> The SDPA with compressed Key and Value is defined as a directional acyclic graph

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The SDPA pattern with compressed Key and Value is defined as a directional acyclic graph
```

(DAG) using oneDNN Graph API. oneDNN extends
[SDPA pattern](@ref dev_guide_graph_sdpa) to support the following three kinds
of compressed SDPA patterns:

1. SDPA with compressed Key and Value.
2. SDPA with floating-point Key and compressed Value.
3. SDPA with compressed Key and floating-point Value.

> The floating-point data types includes f32, f16 and bf16, and the compressed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The floating-point data types include f32, f16 and bf16, and the compressed
```

> data type refers to low-precision integral data types, including int4( u4/s4 )

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
data type refers to low-precision integral data types, including int4 (u4/s4)
```

and int8 (u8/s8) data types.

> In oneDNN Graph API, we support quantization through pattern with quantization

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In oneDNN Graph API, we support quantization through a pattern with quantization
```

operations such as [DynamicDequantize](@ref dev_guide_op_dynamicdequantize) and
[DynamicQuantize](@ref dev_guide_op_dynamicquantize). The supported pattern is
as follows. The blue nodes are required while the brown nodes are optional.

![compressed SDPA pattern](images/compressed_sdpa_pattern.png)

Compared to a typical SDPA pattern, there are a few differences:

> 1. Two additional DynamicDequantize oeprations are applied to the input Key and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Two additional DynamicDequantize operations are applied to the input Key and
```

Value to convert the integral cache to floating-point values. 
2. Apart from the Query, Key and Value inputs, the pattern requires additional
quantization information such as scale and zero-points for the dequantization of
Key and Value caches. Currently, oneDNN only supports grouped quantization
on one dimenstion; specifically, the shapes of scale and zero-points for Key and
Value de-quantization should be ( N, H, S, D/G).
3. Additionally, the `group_shape` attribute of the quantization operations must

> be specified as (1, 1, 1, G) for Key and Value dequantizaiton.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
be specified as (1, 1, 1, G) for Key and Value dequantization.
```

## Data Types

oneDNN supports the following combinations of data types for Query, Key, Value,
output, scale for Key, zero-points for Key, scale for Value and zero-points for
Value:

| Query   |  Key    | Scale_K | Zp_K            |  Value | Scale_V | Zp_V            | Output |
|:--------|:--------|:--------|:----------------|:-------|:--------|:----------------|:-------|
| dt_fp   | dt_int  | dt_fp   | u4,s4,u8,s8,s32 | dt_int | dt_fp   | u4,s4,u8,s8,s32 | dt_fp  |
| dt_fp   | dt_int  | dt_fp   | u4,s4,u8,s8,s32 | dt_fp  | N/A     | N/A             | dt_fp  |
| dt_fp   | dt_fp   | N/A     | N/A             | dt_int | dt_fp   | u4,s4,u8,s8,s32 | dt_fp  |

Notes:

> - dt_fp can be either: f16, bf16 and f32.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- dt_fp can be f16, bf16, or f32.
```

> - dt_int can be either: u8, s8, u4, s4.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- dt_int can be u8, s8, u4, or s4.
```

> - zero-points inputs are optional.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- zero-point inputs are optional.
```

You can specify the data type via the input and output data type fields of
logical tensors for each operation. The definition of the data types and support
status on different CPU and GPU platforms follow the general description in
@ref dev_guide_data_types.

### Floating-point Math Mode

> It's important to set the floating-point math mode

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You should set the floating-point math mode
```

(@ref dev_guide_attributes_fpmath_mode) when using SDPA with compressed Key and

> Value. Generally, the math mode should align the data type of the Query, which

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Value. Generally, the math mode should align with the data type of the Query, which
```

indicates the computation data type. Additionally, the second boolean flag, 
`apply_to_int`, should be set to true. You can configure these attribute values
using the `set_fpmath_mode` API on the graph object.

## Implementation Limitations

> 1. oneDNN primitive-based SDPA with compressed Key and Value is implemented as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- oneDNN primitive-based SDPA with compressed Key and Value is implemented as
```

> the reference implementation on both Intel Architecture Processors and Intel

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a reference implementation on both Intel Architecture Processors and Intel
```

Graphics Products. The reference implementation requires memory to store the
intermediate results of the dot products between Query and Key which takes
\f$O(S^2)\f$ memory. It may lead to Out-of-Memory error when computing long
sequence length input on platforms with limited memory.

> 2. The compressed SDPA patterns functionally support all input shapes meeting

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The compressed SDPA patterns functionally support all input shapes meeting
```

the shape requirements of each operation in the graph.

> 3. CPU

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- CPU
```

    - oneDNN does not provide optimized implementation on CPU currently. All
    executions will be implemented with the primitive-based reference
    computation.

> 4. GPU

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- GPU
```

    - Optimized implementation is available for 4D Q/K/V tensors with the shape
    defined as (N, H, S, D) for Query, Key and Value, and (N, H, S, D/G) for

>     scales and zero-points( if available ).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    scales and zero-points (if available).
```

    - Optimized implementation is avaiable for compressed SDPA with `f16`
    computation data type on Intel Graphics Products with Intel(R) Xe Matrix
    Extensions (Intel(R) XMX) support.
    - If int4 zero-points are specified, optimized implementation will be only

>     avaibable when group size equals to 16.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    available when the group size equals 16.
```
